docs(kb): node eviction for capi node rolling replacement (#1340)
longhorn/website: content/kb/how-to-evict-node-during-capi-node-rolling-replacement.md

---
title: "How to Evict Longhorn Node During CAPI Node Rolling Replacement"
authors:
  - "Raphanus Lo"
draft: false
date: 2026-04-01
versions:
  - "all"
categories:
  - "instruction"
  - "nodes"
---

## Applicable versions

All Longhorn versions.

## Background

> Cluster API (CAPI) performs rolling node replacement by provisioning a new Machine CR and then deleting the old one. If Longhorn has replicas or backing images scheduled on the node being removed, those resources are lost abruptly when the node terminates. This leaves affected volumes in a degraded state until Longhorn can rebuild replicas on remaining nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cluster API (CAPI) performs rolling node replacement by provisioning a new Machine CR and then deleting the old one. If Longhorn has replicas or backing images scheduled on the node being removed, those resources are lost abruptly when the node terminates, which can temporarily degrade volume redundancy and trigger replica rebuilds.
```

Requesting node eviction before the Machine is deleted allows Longhorn to migrate all scheduled replicas and backing images to other nodes gracefully, keeping volumes healthy throughout the replacement.

## Prerequisites

- The volumes using the node being replaced must have a replica count greater than 1.

> - At least one other schedulable node with sufficient disk space must be available to receive the migrated replicas and backing images.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The volumes using the node being replaced must have a replica count greater than 1 (otherwise data loss can occur during node removal).
- At least one other schedulable node with sufficient disk space must be available to receive the migrated replicas and backing images (otherwise eviction will stall and not complete).
```

## Method 1: Manual eviction via kubectl

Use this approach for one-off replacements or when automation is not yet in place.

Patch the Longhorn Node CR to disable scheduling and request eviction:

```bash
kubectl patch node.longhorn.io <node-name> \
  -n longhorn-system --type=merge \
  -p '{"spec":{"allowScheduling":false,"evictionRequested":true}}'
```

Then poll the node status to confirm all resources have migrated off:

```bash
kubectl get node.longhorn.io <node-name> -n longhorn-system -o json \
  | jq '.status.diskStatus | to_entries[]
        | {disk: .key,
           scheduledReplicas: (.value.scheduledReplica | length),
           scheduledBackingImages: (.value.scheduledBackingImage | length)}'
```

> Eviction is complete when every disk reports `scheduledReplicas: 0` and `scheduledBackingImages: 0`. Once confirmed, the node is safe to remove and CAPI can proceed with Machine deletion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Eviction is complete when every disk reports `scheduledReplicas: 0` and `scheduledBackingImages: 0`. Once confirmed, Longhorn no longer depends on the node, and it is safe for CAPI to proceed with Machine deletion.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

> **Note**: Eviction time depends on data size and network throughput, and may take minutes to hours for large volumes.

```

### How the hook works

CAPI supports pre-termination hooks on Machine CRs (see [Machine Deletions](https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/tasks/automated-machine-management/machine_deletions)). When a Machine deletion is triggered, CAPI pauses at the pre-terminate phase until all registered hook annotations are removed from the Machine CR. A controller running in the management cluster can exploit this to drive Longhorn node eviction before the underlying node is terminated.

The general reconcile flow is:

1. **Machine deletion detected**: watch for Machine CRs entering the deletion phase.
2. **Register the hook**: add annotation `pre-terminate.delete.hook.machine.cluster.x-k8s.io/longhorn-node-eviction` to the Machine CR. This blocks CAPI from proceeding with node termination.
3. **Evict the Longhorn node**: connect to the workload cluster's Longhorn API and disable scheduling and request eviction on the corresponding Longhorn Node CR.
4. **Wait for eviction to complete**: poll the node status until all disks report zero scheduled replicas and backing images.

> 5. **Release the hook**: remove the annotation `pre-terminate.delete.hook.machine.cluster.x-k8s.io/longhorn-node-eviction` from the Machine CR. CAPI resumes and terminates the node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Machine deletion detected**: Watch for Machine CRs entering the deletion phase.
2. **Register the hook**: Add annotation `pre-terminate.delete.hook.machine.cluster.x-k8s.io/longhorn-node-eviction` to the Machine CR. This blocks CAPI from proceeding with node termination.
3. **Evict the Longhorn node**: Connect to the workload cluster’s Longhorn API endpoint and disable scheduling and reqCuest eviction on the corresponding Longhorn Node CR.
4. **Wait for eviction to complete**: Poll the Longhorn node status until all disks report zero scheduled replicas and backing images.
5. **Release the hook**: Remove the annotation `pre-terminate.delete.hook.machine.cluster.x-k8s.io/longhorn-node-eviction` from the Machine CR. CAPI resumes and terminates the node.
```

---

> title: "How to Evict Longhorn Node During CAPI Node Rolling Replacement"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: "Graceful Longhorn Node Eviction Before Cluster API (CAPI) Node Replacement"
```

authors:
  - "Raphanus Lo"
draft: false
date: 2026-04-01
versions:
  - "all"
categories:
  - "instruction"
  - "nodes"
---

## Applicable versions

All Longhorn versions.

## Background

Cluster API (CAPI) performs rolling node replacement by provisioning a new Machine CR and then deleting the old one. If Longhorn has replicas or backing images scheduled on the node being removed, those resources are lost abruptly when the node terminates, which can temporarily degrade volume redundancy and trigger replica rebuilds.

Requesting node eviction before the Machine is deleted allows Longhorn to migrate all scheduled replicas and backing images to other nodes gracefully, keeping volumes healthy throughout the replacement.

## Prerequisites

> - The volumes using the node being replaced must have a replica count greater than 1 (otherwise data loss can occur during node removal).

Reviewer 2: > - The volumes using the node being replaced must have a replica count greater than 1 (otherwise data loss can occur during node removal).

Is this required?
IIRC, node eviction also supports single-replica volumes. While evicting a node, the replica is rebuilt on another node and then deletes the old replica.

The general reconcile flow is:

1. **Machine deletion detected**: Watch for Machine CRs entering the deletion phase.
2. **Register the hook**: Add annotation `pre-terminate.delete.hook.machine.cluster.x-k8s.io/longhorn-node-eviction` to the Machine CR. This blocks CAPI from proceeding with node termination.
3. **Evict the Longhorn node**: Connect to the workload cluster’s Longhorn API endpoint and disable scheduling and reqCuest eviction on the corresponding Longhorn Node CR.
4. **Wait for eviction to complete**: Poll the Longhorn node status until all disks report zero scheduled replicas and backing images.
5. **Release the hook**: Remove the annotation `pre-terminate.delete.hook.machine.cluster.x-k8s.io/longhorn-node-eviction` from the Machine CR. CAPI resumes and terminates the node.

The hook annotation key, controller wiring, and workload cluster client configuration are left for the implementer to adapt to their environment.

> ### Python snippets

Reviewer 2: Can we remove the Python snippets and provide a method based on CR operatiopns?
